SECTION 303. Abbot Maximus and his Disputation with Pyrrhus

In the meantime the Abbot Maximus, who was henceforth to be the most valorous champion, and even a martyr for the cause of Dyothelitism, indignant at the progress of the heresy in the East, had left Constantinople in order to go to Rome. Although the name of this remarkable man has already been frequently mentioned, still it is yet in place to recall the earlier events of his life. Born about the year 580 of an old and distinguished family of Constantinople, he had by his remarkable talents and bearing attracted the attention of the Emperor Heraclius, and became his chief secretary, a man of influence and consideration. But in the year 630 he forsook the path of worldly honours, and became a monk in the convent at Chrysopolis (now Scutari), on the opposite shore from Constantinople, as it is thought, both from love of solitude and from dissatisfaction with the position which his master took in the Monothelite controversy. When Sophronius first came forward (A.D. 633) against the new heresy in Alexandria, Maximus was in his company, as he says himself in his letter to Peter. The incompleteness of the Vita Maximi, written by one of his admirers, leaves it doubtful whether he was abbot at that time. It does not mention this first journey to Africa, and speaks only of the second, which drew after it the disputation with Pyrrhus, A.D. 645, and the holding of several African Synods, A.D. 646. On the authority of the Chronicle of Nicephorus (Pagi, ad ann. 642, 1), it is believed that the Patriarch Pyrrhus was formerly abbot of Chrysopolis, and so the predecessor of Maximus, so that when Pyrrhus in the year 639 ascended the patriarchal throne, Maximus became his successor as abbot. But apart from the fact that the Vita Maximi (c. 5) speaks of his predecessor in such a manner that we can see he has died, and refers to him in the most respectful manner, which it would not have done in reference to Pyrrhus, — apart from this, Pyrrhus says expressly, at the beginning of his disputation with Maximus, that " previously he had not known him by sight." Pyrrhus, then, could not have been the abbot of Maximus nor his predecessor in the rule of the convent.

When the Monothelite heresy spread more and more in Constantinople, Maximus resolved to betake himself to Rome, and on the way thither came for the second time to Africa. During a protracted residence there he had much intercourse with the bishops of those parts, and also found a patron in the imperial viceroy, Gregory, and gave general warnings against the Monothelite heresy. To this time also belongs the remarkable disputation between Maximus and the deposed and banished Patriarch Pyrrhus of Constantinople, which, according to the superscription, took place somewhere in Africa, in July 645, in presence of the imperial viceroy and many bishops. The complete Acts have come down to us, and contain a very complete discussion both of the orthodox Dyothelite doctrine and of the objections from the other side. Maximus showed in this much dialectical ability and great superiority to Pyrrhus, whom at times he treated with scant courtesy.

Pyrrhus opened the discussion with the words: " What have I, or what has my predecessor (the Patriarch Sergius), done to you that you everywhere decry us as heretics? Who has honoured you more than we, although we did not know you by sight? "

Maximus replied: " The latter is correct; but since you have violated the Christian dogma, I was forced to place your favour behind the truth. ... The doctrine of one will is contrary to Christianity; for what is more impious than to maintain that the same will by which all things were created, after the Incarnation, longed for food and drink? "

Pyrrhus: " If Christ is only one person, this one so willed; thus there is only one will."

M. " That is confusion. In truth, the one Christ is God and man at the same time. If, however, He is both, then HE willed as God and as man, and, particularly, that which was suitable to the particular nature; no nature dispensed with its will and its energy. If the duality of the natures does not divide the one Christ, no more is this done by the duality of wills and operations."

P. " But two wills presuppose two willers."

M. " That you have certainly maintained in your writings; but it is absurd. Assuming that it were so, that two wills presuppose two willers, then it must be, vice versa, that two willers should have two wills. If you apply this to the Trinity, you must either say with Sabellius, that because in God there is only one will, there is therefore only one Person (one Willer) in the Godhead; or you must say with Arius, because there are three willing (persons), there must therefore be in God three wills, and so three natures, — for the difference of wills, according to the teaching of the Fathers, comes from the difference of natures."

P. " But it is not possible that there should be in one person two wills that do not contradict each other."

M. " By this you will allow that there may be two wills in one person, only it is necessary that they should contradict each other. But whence comes then the contradiction? If from the natural will (in itself), then it would come from God, and God would be the Author of the conflict. But if it comes from sin, then this contradiction could not be in Christ, because He was free from all sin."

P. " The willing is then a matter of nature."

M. " Certainly the simple willing."

P. " But the Fathers say the saints had one will with God; are they, then, of the same nature as God? "

M. " Here is a lack of distinction, and you interchange the object of the will (the thing willed) with the will in itself. The Fathers, by that expression, had only the object of willing in view, and used the expression will, not in the proper sense of the word."

P. " If the will is a matter of nature, then we must often change our nature, for our will changes often, and we must be of a different nature from other men; for they often will differently from ourselves."

M. " We must distinguish the will (as such) from the concrete willing of a definite thing, as we must distinguish sight from the seeing of a definite thing, e.g., whether right or left, upwards or downwards, etc., etc., they are modi of the use of the will or of sight, and by these modi one is distinguished from another."

P. " If you confess two natural wills in Christ, you take away His freedom; for what is natural is necessary."

M. " Neither the divine nor the human rational nature of Christ is other than free; for the nature which is endowed with reason has the natural power of rational desire, i.e. the θέλησις (the willing of the rational soul). But from the proposition, " the natural is necessary," there follows an absurdity. God is natura good, natura Creator, then was it of necessity that HE should be Creator and good. And were he not free who has a natural will, then, conversely, he must be free who has no natural will, therefore that which is lifeless."

P. " I concede that there are in Christ natural wills; but, as of two natures ἕν τι σύνθετον is acknowledged by us, so must we also of two wills admit ἕν τι σύνθετον; and therefore they who acknowledge two wills, because of the duality of nature, should not contend with those who assume only one will because of the closest union, — it is only a strife of words."

M. " You are mistaken, because you do not perceive that unions (syntheses) take place only in things which are immediately in the hypostasis (as the natures), but not in things which are in another (as the wills in the natures). If, however, we assume a union of the wills, we should also be forced to assume a union of all the other properties of the natures, thus, e.g., a union of the created with the uncreated, of the limited with the illimitable, of the mortal with the immortal, and so come to absurd assertions." . . .

P. " Have not, then, the properties of the natures something in common, like the natures themselves? "

M. " No, they have nothing in common (i.e. the properties of the one nature have nothing in common with those of the other), but the one hypostasis."

P. " But do not the Fathers speak of a communion of glory and a communion of humiliation when they say, the communion of the glory has one source, and another that of the ignominy? " (Thus said Leo the Great, see vol. iii. sec. 176, c. 4, where he speaks of this, that the common honour of the Godhead and manhood in Christ has a different source from the common ignominy of both.)

M. " The Fathers speak here after the manner of ἀντίδοσις (of the communicatio idiomatum). This, however, presupposes two dissimilar things, since that which naturally belongs to the one part of Christ (e.g., to Him as God) is ascribed to the other part (the Son of man). And if, after the manner of the ἀντίδοσις, you call the θέλημα of Christ a κοινόν, you confess thereby not one but two wills."

P. "How? Was not the flesh of Christ moved by the suggestion of the Logos united with it? "

M. " If you say this, you divide Christ; for by His suggestion also Moses was moved, and David, etc. But we say with the Fathers that the same highest God who unchanged became man, not only as God willed that which was suitable to His Godhead, but the same also as man willed that which was suitable to His manhood. As all things have the δύναμις of the existent, and this naturally is the ὁρμὴ (the inclination) to the profitable, and the ἀφορμὴ (drawing back, escaping) from the destructive, so also the Incarnate Logos had this δύναμις of self-preservation, and showed His ὁρμὴ and ἀφορμὴ through His energy: the ὁρμὴ in the use of physical things (yet without sin), and the ἀφορμὴ when He shrunk from voluntary death. Does the Church, then, do something unsuitable when it holds fast in the human nature also the properties innate in it, without which the nature cannot be? "

P. " But if there is fear in the nature, then there is something evil in it, and the human nature (of Christ) is yet free from all evil."

M. " You deceive yourself by similarity of sound. There are two kinds of fear, one according to nature and one not according to nature. The former serves for the preservation of nature, the other is irrational. Christ showed only the former; I say showed, because with Him all that was physical was voluntary. He hungered and thirsted and feared in truth, but yet not as we do, but voluntarily."

P. " We should avoid all subtleties, and simply say, Christ is true God and true man, and abstain from everything else (i.e. the properties and wills of the natures.)"

M. " That would be a rejection of the Synods and Fathers, who have made declarations respecting not only the natures, but also their properties, teaching that one and the same is visible and invisible, mortal and immortal, tangible and intangible, created and uncreated. They also taught two wills, not merely by use of the number two, but also by the opposition of ἄλλο καὶ ἄλλο and by the relation of divine and human."

P. " We should speak neither of one nor of two wills, since the Synods have not done so, and the heretics misuse these expressions."

M. " If only the expressions of the Synods were to be used, then they would not say, μία φύσις τοῦ θεοῦ λόγου σεσαρκωμένη. Moreover, even if they would only hold by the Synods, they would be compelled from the two natures and their properties (which the Synod of Chalcedon taught) to infer two wills, and to recognise them. Among the properties of a nature we understand that which physically belongs to it, and to each nature of Christ there is a will akin to the nature (φυσικῶς ἐμπέφυκεν). And if the Synods anathematised Apollinaris and Arius, each of whom taught only one will, the former, because he declared that the σάρξ of Christ was of like substance with the Godhead, and Arius, because he, lowering the Son, ascribed to Him no truly divine will; how, then, can we hesitate to teach two wills? Further, the fifth Synod declared: ' We recognise all the writings of Athanasius, Basil, Gregory,' etc. Now, in these, two wills are clearly taught."

P. " Does not, then, the expression natural will seem objectionable to you? "

M. " There are three kinds of life in creatures,— the life of the plant, the life of feeling, and the life of thought. It is the proper nature of the plant, to grow, etc.; of the creatures that feel, to desire; of the creatures that think, to will. All that is rational, then, must by nature be voluntary. Now, the Logos has assumed a rationally quickened humanity, therefore must He also, so far as He is man, be voluntary."

P. " I am convinced that the wills in Christ belong to the natures, the creaturely will to His created nature, etc., and that the two wills cannot combine into one. But those in Byzantium who oppose the natural wills maintain that the Fathers had said that the Lord had a human will κατ’ οἰκείωσιν (appropriation)."

M. " There are two kinds of appropriation, namely, the essential, by which everyone has what belongs to his nature, and the relative, when we in a friendly manner appropriate something foreign to ourselves. Which appropriation is here meant? "

P. " The relative."

M. " How unsuitable this is will soon appear. The natural is not acquired; so, too, will is not acquired, consequently man has by nature the power of willing. . . . If, now, those persons maintain that Christ has assumed the human will only as something foreign, they must in consistency say that He also appropriated the other properties of human nature merely as something foreign, by which the whole Incarnation becomes an appearance. Further, Sergius anathematised everyone who admits two wills. Now, even the teachers of that οἰκείωσις assume two wills, even if one of them is only the appropriated one, thus anathematising the friends of Sergius themselves. And when they, falsely indeed, maintain that two wills render two persons necessary, then the teachers of that οἰκείωσις themselves bring two persons into Christ."

P. " Did not, then, the Fathers teach that Christ had formed our will in Himself, ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἐτύπωσε? "

M. " Yes, they also taught that HE had assumed our nature, but by that they did not mean κατ’ οἰκείωσιν."

P. " But when they say, Christ formed our will in Himself, can a natural will be meant by this? "

M. " Certainly; since Christ is also true man, He has in Himself and by Himself subjected the human to God, set up for us a pattern to will nothing but what God wills."

P. " But those who admit only one will mean it not ill."

M. " Even the Severians say, they mean it not ill, when they admit only one nature. But which, then, should this one will be? "

P. " They call it the gnomish, and γνώμη is, as Cyril says, the τρόπος ζωῆς, that we live virtuously or sinfully."

M. " The manner of life is matter of choice; but by choice we will, therefore γνώμη is the willing of a real or supposed good. How can we now say, the will is gnomish, i.e. of a γνώμη? That means nothing else than that the will goes out from a will, which is not possible. Moreover, if one ascribes to Christ a γνώμη (a choice), He is thus made a mere man, as though HE, like us, had not known what to do, had hesitated and deliberated. . . . Should we not rather say, as His personality was divine, He possessed, in His very being, the natural good? "

P. " Are, then, the virtues something natural? "

M. " Certainly."

P. " But why, then, are not all men equally virtuous, since all are of one nature? "

M. " Because we do not develop the natural in like measure, nor in like measure strive after that for which we are born."

P. " But yet we acquire the virtues by discipline? "

M. " Discipline and the efforts following upon it only serve to drive away the deceptions of sin. When these disappear, the natural virtues come of themselves."

P. " It is, then, blasphemy to assert one γνώμη in Christ."

M. " The Fathers use γνώμη in a different sense, e.g., as counsel, as Paul, when he says: ' Concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment (γνώμην),' or as advice, or as sentence, as opinion, view. I have found, in the Bible and in the Fathers, twenty-eight meanings of γνώμη. . . . Those, then, who maintain a gnomish, or choosing will, etc., must give it out for either a divine or angelic or human will. If they explained it as divine, they assume only a divine nature of Christ; if angelic, only an angelic nature; if human, then only a human nature."

P. " In order to escape all this, they say the will is neither matter of nature nor of gnome, but it is in us matter of dexterity (ἐπιτηδειότης, habilitas)."

M. " This dexterity is either κατὰ φύσιν, and then that expression only leads back by a roundabout way to the natural will, or the dexterity is a matter of acquisition. In the latter case, they must maintain, in opposition to the Scriptures, that Christ did not know until HE learnt, and so fall into Nestorianism, which admits only one will in the two persons invented by it. If, however, they call that one will of Christ the hypostatic, then it belongs only to the person of the Son, and they maintain thereby that the Son has another will than the Father. If they call it παρὰ φύσιν, they thereby destroy the natures in Christ. I should like to ask them: Does God the Father will as God or as Father? If He wills as Father, then His will is different from that of the Son, which is heretical. But if He wills as God, then it follows that the will is a matter of nature. Further, as the Fathers teach: Two, who have only one will, have also only one substance, so that the Monothelites are forced to maintain that the Godhead and the manhood in Christ are one and the same substance. Further, as the Fathers teach: Two kinds of substances (οὐσίαι) have not a common will, yet may they necessarily not maintain that the two natures of Christ had a common will; or if they do maintain it, they contradict the Fathers."

P. " But they appeal to the Fathers."

M. " Only the Nestorians and Monophysites, although opposites, teach one will, but not the recognised Fathers."

P. " But Gregory the theologian (Orat. 2, De Filio) says: His will was in nothing contradictory to God, quite deified. Does not this speak against two wills? "

M. " On the contrary, as the kindled presupposes a kindler, so the deified a deifier. Moreover, the same Gregory similarly speaks of the human nature of Christ as deified. Must we therefore deny the two natures? "

P. " You are right, but they also adduce Gregory of Nyssa (Orat. 1, De Resur.), who says of Christ: The soul of Christ wills, the body (of the sick man) is touched, and through both the sickness is driven away (S. Matt. viii. 3). Here, they maintain, Gregory teaches that the human soul of Christ willed through the divine will of the Godhead hypostatically united with it."

M. " If one should say that the willing of the ψυχὴ comes from the Godhead, then we might also say with equal right, that even the bodily touch comes from the Godhead, which is absurd."

P. " You are right. But they appeal also to Athanasius, who (Orat. major, De Fide) says, the (human) νοῦς of the Lord is not the Lord Himself, but His will, or His βούλησις or His energy upon anything."

M. " This passage is evidence against them. For if the νοῦς of Christ is not the Lord Himself, then it is evidently not divine φύσει, but hypostatically united with the Lord, and therefore His θέλησις, βούλησις, or ἐνέργεια. Athanasius speaks here according to the usage of Clement of Alexandria (Stromat. lib. vi.), according to which θέλησις = νοῦς ὀρεκτικός (desiring spirit), βούλησις = rational desire; the expression ἐνέργεια πρός τι, however, was used by S. Athanasius because the Lord, in all His godlike acts (acts belonging to His divine nature), made use of the reasonable human soul hypostatically united with Him."

P. " You are right; but Athanasius says further: The Lord was born of woman, but without carnal θελήματα and λογισμοὶ ἀνθρώπινοι; the θέλησις was only that of the Godhead."

M. "Athanasius does not here at all speak of the will of Christ, but of this, that the Incarnation resulted purely from the divine will, without the will of the flesh, without the action of a man. Generally, the Fathers teach, like the Holy Scriptures, that the Lord willed and effected our salvation in His two natures."

P. " Have the great kindness to show this."

M. " According to S. John i. 43, Jesus purposed to go to Galilee. He purposed to go where He was not yet. He was, however, only in His manhood, not in Galilee; for as God He is everywhere. He purposed, therefore, to go to Galilee as man, not as God, and consequently had a will as man. So in S. John xvii. 24, HE willed as man that where HE was His disciples should also be; for only as man is He in a certain place. In S. John xix. 28 and S. Matt. xxvii. 34, Jesus said: ' I thirst,' and would not drink the wine mingled with gall; but evidently it is only the manhood that can thirst, and therefore it was only this that willed not to take the unsuitable draught. Also in S. John vii. 1; S. Mark ix. 29; vii. 24; 2 Cor. xiii. 4; S. Mark vi. 48; S. Matt. xxvi. 17; and Phil. (not Hebrews, as Maximus says) ii. 8, is the human will of Christ referred to. In Psalm xxxix. [xl.] 7, 8, it is said: ' Sacrifice and meat-offering Thou wouldest not; but mine ears hast Thou opened [in the text, as in Hebrews x. 5, a body hast Thou prepared me]. . . . Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfil Thy will, O my God. I am content to do it.' That this refers to Christ as man no one denies; and accordingly this passage ascribes a will to Him also as man. According to Gen. i. 26, man is made in the image of God; and therefore human nature must have the power of freedom, like the divine. And if Christ did not assume a human will, as they maintain, then did He not save it, and we are not partakers of a complete salvation. But that the Lord had also a divine will is clear from S. Luke xiii. 34 and S. John v. 21."

P. "This certainly proves two natural wills. But why did Pope Vigilius accept the letter of Mennas, which teaches only one will, after it had been shown to him in the cabinet of the Emperor (Justinian), and in the senate? "

M. " I am surprised that you and your predecessors, being patriarchs, should venture to lie. Sergius said in his letter to Honorius, that Vigilius had received information respecting that letter, but not that it was shown him or delivered to him; but you say, in your letter to Pope John, that it had been shown and delivered to him. Which of you is one to believe? "

P. " But Pope Honorius, in his letter to Sergius, maintained only one will."

M. " The drawer-up of that letter of Honorius, who was afterwards commissioned by John IV. to write to the Emperor Constantine, gives the assurance that he only said in the letter, that as man Jesus had only one will (the law of the Spirit), and not at the same time also the will of the members."

P. " My predecessor understood it differently."

M. " Nothing placed me at such a distance from your predecessor as his inconstancy. At one time he approved the expression, one divine will of Christ; at another, one βουλευτικὸν θέλημα; at another, one ὑποστατικόν; at another, ἐξουσιατικόν: again, προαιρετικόν; again, γνωμικόν; again, οἰκονομικόν. Moreover, by those documents (the Ecthesis) he has caused division." (In that which follows, Maximus opposes the statement of Pyrrhus, that Sophronius of Jerusalem had begun the controversy.)

M. " We will now, after ending the inquiry into the two wills, pass on to the two energies."

P. " As the will is a matter of nature, so must also, per synecdochen, the operation be a matter of nature, and I recall my previous assertions in opposition." ...

M. " In your writings I have found that you ascribe to Christ, as whole, only one energy. Now, as His whole being is His hypostasis, then this, His one energy, must also be hypostatic. But then, would it be different from the energy of His Father and His mother, as He is hypostatically different from both?"

P. " If you maintain two energies on account of the difference of natures in Christ, and not one only on account of the unity of His person, then you must assume two energies in man on account of the substantial difference of body and soul, and consequently there would be in Christ three energies."

M. " What you here allege against the properties of the natures (in Christ), the Monophysites turn against the natures themselves, and that which the Fathers have opposed to them we bring against you. You admit with us two natures in Christ, and not merely one on account of the unity of His person. If, however, you maintain two energies in man, because of the substantial difference of body and soul, you must also assume two natures in man, and accordingly three in Christ. But if you do not admit three natures in Christ, you have likewise no right to reproach us for not maintaining three energies. Moreover, that which is one in respect to the species (εἶδος) of man, is not also one by substantial unity of body and soul. Human nature is one because it is common to the whole species, and not because body and soul were one. So it is in regard to the energy. When we ascribe to Christ one human energy as such, we oppose the alternative of either ascribing the energy to the personality (hypostasis), or of recognising three energies in Christ, because the energy works according to the nature."

P. " Nestorius says that the persons correspond with the energies; therefore, by the doctrine of two energies, you fall into Nestorianism."

M. " Above all, Nestorius taught, along with two persons, only one will. But even if what you say were true, that the persons correspond with the energies, then conversely, the energies would have to correspond with the persons, and you would then, on account of the three Persons, have to recognise three energies in the Trinity, or, on account of the one energy, only one Person. . . . So, too, we should have to say, because there are several Persons in the Trinity, there are also several human energies, whilst there is, in fact, only one human energy (κατ’ εἶδος), and the Fathers (Gregory of Nyssa) say: That which has the same substance (οὐσία) has also the same energy. Further, if they maintain that persons correspond with energies, and if they themselves (elsewhere) say, Christ has many energies (the words of Honorius), it would follow that they would be forced to ascribe many persons to the one Christ. Further, if persons correspond with energies, then the latter cease when the former is removed. The Monothelites, however, now wish to remove the expression one or two energies, and therewith would, if they could, remove Christ Himself. If we consider ourselves, we find that each of us can walk and think at the same time without, for this reason, becoming two men, and without mingling the energies corresponding to his two natures (body and soul). In the same way, a sword which is made red hot preserves its two natures (iron and fire), and their natural operations, — it cuts and it burns at the same time; but it is yet only one sword, without its natures being mixed."

P. "But there is (in Christ) only one Worker, and therefore only one operation, energy."

M. " This one in person is twofold in natures, and therefore worked in a twofold manner as one, so that with the multiplicity of energies there was not also a multiplicity of persons brought in. If, however, we ascribed the energy, not to the natures but to the person, we should arrive at follies which have already been rejected. What would you say if another maintained: Because Christ is one person, He had only one nature? Yet, if you admit only one energy, which shall this one be? — the divine or the human, or neither? If the divine, then was Christ pure God; if the human, then only man: if neither, then He was neither God nor man."

P. " If we speak of one energy of the Godhead and the manhood, we do not mean that it is present in Him λόγῳ φύσεως, but τρόπῳ ἑνώσεως (by the union of the Godhead and manhood)."

M. " If He has the energy, as you say, through ἕνωσις, then was HE before this ἕνωσις without energy, and thus created the world without energy and with constraint. Further: As the Father and the Holy Spirit are not also hypostatically united with the flesh, then would they, in consequence, have no energy, and would not also be Creator of the world? Further, you must call the energy either created or uncreated, for there is no third kind. If created, then it points to only one created nature in Christ; in the other case, only to one uncreated: and how could the energy of a created nature be an uncreated, and conversely? "

P. " Do you agree, then, with those who understand the ἀποτέλεσμα (effect) of the actions accomplished by Christ under μία ἐνέργεια?"

M. " Different actions have different effects, and not one. Although, in the red-hot sword, the energy of fire and that of iron are united, yet the effect of fire is burning, that of iron cutting, even if they do not appear separated from each other in the burning cut or in the cutting burn. We cannot speak of one effect unless where there is one action. As, then, there are many actions of Christ, so you must admit countless effects; or if you will hold fast one effect, then must you also assume one action of Christ. But we have not to speak of the actions of Christ, nor of that which is ἔξω Χριστοῦ, but of that which is ἐν Χριστῷ, of the physical relation of the substances (οὐσίαι) of Christ, whether it was encroached upon by the union of the Godhead and manhood or not. . . . Moreover, you have not (as you would make believe) spoken with respect to the action (τὸ ἔργον, ἀποτέλεσμα), but with respect to the physical relation of the united natures of one energy, and so have produced the fabulous animal, the goat-stag. This is shown clearly by the capitula of Cyrus, which you have received, in which it is taught that Christ worked the divine and the human by the same energy. This contradicts Scripture and the holy Fathers, and even the nature of the thing; for no thing can have, along with its natural working, another opposed to it, — fire cannot make warm and cold at the same time. So one nature cannot work miracles and endure suffering."

P. " Yet Cyril says, Christ revealed μίαν συγγενῆ δι’ ἀμφοῖν ἐνέργειαν."

M. " Cyril was far from ascribing to the Godhead and the manhood only one φυσικὴ ἐνέργεια, for he teaches elsewhere: ' No rational person will assert that the Creator and the creature have one and the same energy.' On the contrary, he wished to show that the divine energy is one and the same, both apart from union with the manhood and in union therewith, just as the energy of fire is one and the same, whether with or without union with a ὕλη. The Father Cyril has not thus spoken of one energy of the two natures in Christ, but said that the divine energy was one and the same, — the same in the Incarnate Son as in the Father; and that Christ worked His miracles, not by an almighty command ( = divine energy), but asomatically, — even after the Incarnation He is ὁμοεργὸς with the asomatically working Father, — but He also worked them somatically by bodily contact, ἁφῇ, and thus δι’ ἀμφοῖν. The reviving of the maiden, accomplished by the word and the almighty will, and the healing of the blind, was connected with the healing which was accomplished somatically by contact. The divine energy did not dispense with the human, but made use of it for its own manifestation. The stretching out of the hand (at the healing of the blind), the mixture of spittle and earth, etc., belonged to the energy of the human nature of Christ, and God as well as man was acting in the miracle. Cyril, then, did not make a mistake about the property of each nature, but saw the creative divine energy and the ζωτικὴ (i.e. the bodily energy worked by the human soul), as ἀσυγχύτως united in the Incarnate Logos."

P. " You have well shown that S. Cyril did not contradict the doctrine of two energies, but, on the contrary, harmonised with it; but S. Dionysius the Areopagite speaks of a καινὴ θεανδρικὴ ἐνέργεια."

M. " Do you hold this καινὴ θεανδρικὴ ἐνέργεια as something quantitatively or qualitatively new?"

P. "As quantitatively new."

M. "Then there must have been assumed in Christ a third nature, θεανδρικὴ; for a third energy (and it was that, if it was quantitatively new) presupposes a third nature, since the element of proper essential energy belongs to the idea of nature. If, however, the new is qualitatively new, this does not express a single energy, but the new mysterious way and manner of the human activities (energies) of Christ, which is a consequence of the mysterious union and perichoresis ( = mutual interchange of movement) of the two natures in Christ. Even in the expression, θεανδρικὴ ἐνέργεια, the duality of the energies is also taught periphrastically (mediately), because it specifies the natures numerically. For if we remove the two opposites (divine and human in Christ), there remains nothing intermediate. And provided there were only a single energy in Christ, the θεανδρικὴ, then Christ, as God, would have a different energy from the Father, for that of the Father could not possibly be divine and human."

P. " The proposition, ' That which is of like nature has also the like energy (as the three Persons of the Trinity), and that which is distinguished in the energy is also distinguished in the nature,' — this proposition has been adopted by the Fathers only in respect to the theology (nature of God), and not in respect to the economy (Incarnation)."

M. " Thus, then, according to you, the Son, after His Incarnation, would not be of the same theology with the Father; He could then be no longer invoked with the Father, He would not be of one substance with the Father, and the passages of the Bible would be untrue which ascribe to Him the same energy as to the Father (S. John v. 17, 19, 21; x. 25, 38). Further, the continuous government of the world is the business of God, not only of the Father and of the Spirit, but also of the Son. Consequently, the Son, even after the Incarnation, has the same energy as the Father." ...

P. " When we speak of one energy, we do not mean to take away the human will of Christ, but in distinction from the divine energy it is called suffering."

M. " Things are not known from their opposite by mere negation, otherwise we should have to call, e.g., human nature evil because the divine is good. And in like manner, we may not say that because the divine movement is energy (working), therefore the human is a suffering [active and passive]. The Fathers do not call human action mere suffering (passion), but also δύναμις, ἐνέργεια, κίνησις, etc., etc., not in opposition to the divine activity, but after its own way and manner which it has received from the Creator. So far as, e.g., it works holding, it is called δύναμις; so far as it is the same in all beings of the same species (ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς ὁμοειδέσιν), it is called ἐνέργεια, etc., etc. And also, when the Fathers called the human action a passion, they did this, not in opposition to the divine action, but in respect to the way and manner of human working, itself implanted by the Creator. And when (Pope) Leo says, 'Agit utraque forma,' etc., this is nothing else than if it was said: ' After HE had fasted forty days, He was an hungered.' He granted, in short, to nature, when He would, that it should work that which was proper to it."

P. " You have shown that it is improper to speak of one energy in whatever way that may be done. But forgive me and my predecessors. We have failed only from want of insight. Spare the memory of my predecessors."

M. " We must anathematise the heresy, but be silent about persons."

P. " But in that case I should have to reject Sergius and my own patriarchal Synod " (see sec. 300).

M. "It was not a regular Synod."

P. "If it must be, I will do it (anathematise the heresy), but I should like first to visit the graves of the apostles and the Pope, and transmit to the latter a statement on my error."

Thus ended this disputation, and the information is added, that Maximus and the Governor Gregory agreed to this, and Pyrrhus with Maximus soon afterwards went to Rome, where Pyrrhus cast off his error, and by an orthodox confession united himself again with the Church.
